Okay, yeah. That's the best part. That's been most
of the time with Lloyd. Okay, Rick, tell me your
name, full name, please, and your place and date of
birth and the whole thing. My name is John
Frederick Stetter. Rick is derived from the
Frederick. I was born in San Francisco,
California, February 28, 1947. and spent quite
early. I grew up in Northern California. Where? A
lot of it in a little town called Nevada City, which
is a gold rush. See, I worked in Georgetown,
California once. Yeah, yeah. Yeah, and that was
not too far away, was it? No, it's just across the
country. That was the greatest summer that I ran in
my life. It was
a wonderful place to grow up. And? You grew up
there, went to high school in Nevada City? Yeah,
Nevada Union High School. And college? I went off
to... Your parents, what were they doing? Oh, my
father worked in the steel industry, and then they
moved to the San Francisco area after I got out of
the house. And my father basically worked for the
Department of Defense for most of his life. Oh,
Danny? Yeah. Lois was a mauler. A mauler's a super
mauler. That's an amazing thing for a guy like him
to come out of that deal and go to Reed College.
Yeah, Medford. Yeah, Medford and then to Reed
College. My mom was a housewife.
She did. Yeah. So, then to school, college. I went
on to the University of California, Berkeley in
1960, fall of 65. Why Berkeley? Oh, it was all kinds
of reasons that got me out at the time living in
Northern California. What I wanted to do was get
out of
Northern California and move to the city in San
Francisco up to North Beach and follow in the
footsteps of the poor. So you hit it right at prime
time. Yeah, it turned out for sure. Too prime time
for me by the time Middle of 1967, I was on enormous
academic probation by the spring of 67. Although
it was difficult to be thrown out of Berkeley in
that time, I was thrown out of Berkeley. Don't
worry. And shortly thereafter, my draft board-
Did they? Yeah. Decided I was 1A, and that was it. So
I was drafted in 68, went to Vietnam in 69, and came
back. in January of 1907 and then went back to
school in Sacramento County. You were getting
over a year? Yeah. What, in infantry? It was a funny
thing. I was trained. I had to normally do a draft
before school. Yeah. strange sequence of events i
let him go to uh air traffic patrols which was run by
the air force over the western mississippi uh but i
got over there and they shipped me into an infantry
unit up on the cambodia border and i showed up and
locked up and said i have a new atc guy and first
sergeant laughed said he didn't need no atc guys
and i would say He was going to be on a helicopter
trip
so for the first four months I was an observer on a
little scout helicopter that flew around and got
shot at. It was a real bad job to have. I don't think
so. And finally, somebody rotated out of the
building a tower. They had a patchy tower. So I got
to put that into the tower. So I finished it. So you
worked there for about a year or anything during
that time? No, a little less. I was there for two
years, and I got shipped over there a year and a
month into it, so I was there about two years. my
neighbor across the street decorated vietnam
whatever really wounded and all that kind of stuff
packed my neighbor over on westover street coming
along we had two different tours he was a engineer
officer built roads or built whatever they built
over there yeah they built everything
So you came back and finished. Yeah, I did finish at
Berkeley with Cal State Sacramento. In what?
English.
I got a bachelor's degree and I was sort of sitting
in the graduate department there, not because I
had any good vocation, but because I didn't know
what else to do. And my best friend in the world, who
I'd been with at Vietnam, called me up from Five
Stamps, Arizona and said, hey, I'm working for a
publisher down here. Did I want a job? I said, hell
yes. I moved down to Flagstaff and worked for the
Northland Press. The Northland Press? Yeah,
which still
is a publisher of books on Native American
architecture and stuff. Commercial work. So that
was, what year was that?
It was 72. And so you moved to Flagstaff? Yeah. I
like that. best place i like sedona we all we are
still trying to retire me too because you know i did
a history of the forest service in the southwest i
remember when you did that yeah in the 80s early 80s
or something like that and we went through there
and we both loved it oh it's the best and i probably
had a nickel then to spend you know and the prices
were probably Okay. Oh, you could, yeah, you could
buy some stuff. And we actually looked in the
house. We walked in the house within 30 minutes
there, I guess, about
two or three years ago. Okay, so you have a job in
Flagstaff. How long were you with them? What are
you doing? Well, that was interesting. I started
out... just its back door in the production
department. I was literally polishing the press
and loading the paper and doing stuff like that
just to be in publishing. And, uh, Worsland at that
time, it was a wholly owned subsidiary of Justin
Industries, uh, out of Fort Worth, which is Justin
Foods and Justin Cohen. Oh, it's a huge
multinational. Uh, but, John Justin had loved
Western art, and he buddied up with the guy who
founded Northern Press, who was a crazy alcoholic
called Weaver. He was a great bookman. In fact,
Weaver really found me at the brain. And I went from
being the load-runner on the production of the
production department to the editor-in-chief
over about two years. Mostly because so many
people above me It was a terrible
place to live. And so I was, after about two and a
half years, the Museum of Northern Arizona, which
is just up the road from Boston, decided to expand
their publication program. So I went up there as
the publisher for the museum. Did you really? That
should have been mine. Oh, it was wonderful. And I
got to spend, we did a quarterly color magazine
called Plateau, which was on the Native American
cultures and natural history of Colorado
Plateau. So your job with them was editor,
director of their press, or what did you call it? I
was the, well, we called it the head of
publications. Okay. some regional
trade books, we did technical archaeology and
geology, and we did the journal. It was a great job.
I got to draft the Colorado and dig up dinosaurs,
and Chen Li, because we had this big research thing
going. That was really what was paying for the
build. And that was
wonderful. And I did that for three years now. So,
let me kind of do that. So, 72, 3, 4, 5, 75, say to 70.
70, 79, yeah. 279,
yeah. 75, I think it's 79, yeah. In the museum, the
economy that grows called Contract Archaeology.
What happened was they brought in some real
business types to our museum. They jacked up the
overhead. And a lot of the guys that learned how to
do salvage archaeology and paleo, the museum left
and set up their own little companies. And so we
were charged 60% overhead, they were charged two.
So that all, the whole museum over a period of a
couple years got flipped over, and the whole
research side. There was wonderful people there
for about 24 years. And they all went off to do other
things. In fact, there's an alumni association
now that I just couldn't get aware of. Is that
right? Yeah. So my boss, who had been the dean of
liberal arts at the University of Arizona, Herman
Whitefield, He called me up one day, and I came to
his office, and he said, look, you're going
to have to lay off, I think I had four people on the
staff, you're going to have to lay off two of them,
and if I were you, I'd be out of here by the end of
December, because I'm going back to Tucson, and
it's going to get tough. So, I went to work for a big
aerospace outfit out of Silicon Valley, Kaiser
Aerospace. doing technical publications, which
is where I met my wife, Christine. And I did that
for... That's Kaiser Aerospace. Yeah. They sure
took a look at me when the Cold War stopped. Is that
right? Oh, Jesus, yeah. But it was big, because I
was here in the early 60s. So you were a technical
editor or something for them? Yeah. We didn't do
the main spectrum, but we provided the system. Her
first name is C-H? Uh, C-H. All right. That's
P-I-N-N. Yeah. I think I remember her spelling it.
They like to spell it. I don't know. I'll probably
get canned. She would be the one. It's fair. She was
not a good interviewer. She was one of the worst.
She's... She's a traitor. And I thought I knew. I
don't think anybody does that. That's crazy.
Okay,
so you met, you married. Actually, what we met, and
then I, after about a year, I took a job as the editor
of the Great Basin National History Series at the
University of Nevada Press.
Okay, hold on, let me get that. You got an editor at
the Great Basin. And that was a funded series. We
had a bunch of books, a series of books. It was
great. And now that was where? University of
Nevada Press, which is
located there. And the director there was the
first director, the only director, was Robert
Waxholtz, who was Paul Waxholtz's brother. He was
the center. Old Nevada basketball. And Bob was a
crappy
press writer. He was a great writer. That was
really what
he did. He was a
great press writer. Lacksall. Is it L-A?
L-A-X-C-L-T. Okay. Is it Robert or Bob? Robert.
Very distinguished writer. And Bob retired
suddenly right then and there before Bob.
I was by way
far a junior guy on the staff, but because the other
people on the staff had managed to piss all kinds of
other folks off over the years, I was the only
acceptable candidate for acting director. I
couldn't believe they called me up, the
chancellor called me up and said, you want to be the
acting director? I said, shit, are you kidding?
So, and it took them about a year, no, yeah, about a
year to hire me. They left me do that for a year and
gave me a chance to show them the stuff so that I got,
I was hired to work there and stay there. So that
started about 1980? Three or four. Let's see, I
got, I was named director in 1984. But you were
acting a year before that? Yeah. Oh yeah, sure, I
was, it was a little press, but it was. Yeah. I do
like Reno. I love it. Reno itself, there's nothing
to recommend the town, but if you go west, you're
right into the Sierras. If you go east or north,
you're into the Great Basin Desert, which is
gorgeous. There's a lake, everybody thinks about
Lake Tahoe. You go down north to Reno, it's a
pyramid lake, named by John Freeman, which is
bigger than Lake Tahoe, but it's a desert lake.
It's a lot of fun. And my wife's family, my family, I
work at San Francisco. And it's just a three-hour
trip. Yeah, the last time we'd been there was,
again, 20 years ago or so. It was kind of
interesting. You know, we'd been to what we'd
gambled. We only won $370 on a nickel machine.
Damn! That was big stuff. That was going. Coming
back, we left it. Oh, yeah, yeah. But it was
interesting. But I never quite figured Reno out.
It's probably changed. It was small, but the
downtown is still the downtown. Because when we
were there years ago, the only thing there was that
big Hilton Hotel and the car museum. But this
gambling was big. And man, there's a Silver
Legacy, Circus Circus, and they're all making
good. It's not Las Vegas now. We like Las Vegas. But
it kind of grows over the years. The thing is, my
best friend in the world still, who was on my
editorial board, and who every now and then was an
author, and he's not an editor anymore. He has been
an editor for about a decade now. I love it. I just
can't get enough of it. We're going on a trip. Oh,
it's a trip. There's some good stuff down there,
too. We're going to do a chant of Death Valley.
We're going to use it right at the dam. We're going
to go down to the San Luis Dam in the area now. And
then up to Virginia. Not to Virginia. To... I don't
know. Did you know
Nick Davies? Did I ever ask you that? You know what,
Davies, when I told him I was coming down to
interview for his job, he said, You tell my good
friend Henry Detlock that when I... Maybe you told
me that. When I came walking into Shannari's to
meet you guys, and I clicked those boxes over, I had
two. I was armed with two pieces of information.
One of them was that you were a friend of Dick Davis.
Okay. And the other one had something to do with
Dave Schmidt. And that was my entourage. Okay.
Because I got a letter from Dick the other day. But I
didn't call him while I was up there, and I should
have. For a while, he was the highest paid
professor because he went from being... Yeah, he
was a chancellor or whatever of that division. He
was like, oh yeah, he was a big guy. Yeah. And he
stepped down under pressure. And the history
department, who he basically, they understood
that he, in their view, had betrayed. They were so
pissed at him that they wouldn't let him get an
office, or the rest of them had their office, so he
was in a little basement over at the health
services. The thing was, he was making about
$140,000 a year sitting in that little basement,
so he didn't care. He told me when he came by with
Amy, he said, shit, I'm laughing all the way to the
next room. Well, I can sympathize with that. Yeah.
Well, but anyway, he had published this thing in
Harcourt's series, Home of Sports. Yeah. And I got
a publication out, this is Yeah, it was nice. I
don't know how it worked. Oh, you haven't been
sitting on your- No, I haven't been sitting on it.
Right now, I'm trying to get a contract to do a
history of the Savannah River Nuclear Reactor
Program.
And we just finished a history of the… I'll tell you
about it. In December, this past December, one of
the authors of the Galileo Incorporated, we did a
history of planetary astronomy for NASA. Yeah,
great. I wasn't the key author, but my contract,
so… Do you remember that one you did for the Alabama
Missile…
NASA? Oh, you mean my application? Yeah, whatever
it is. Nothing. Didn't get that. And I don't
remember what all the, that was, um, I don't know, I
don't remember. I don't remember.
I don't remember. I don't remember. Sometimes.
Anyway. And David, I guess, is doing all right. Oh,
yeah. Okay, that's the acting director, and then
your director, Nate Fortill.
What came
to your
mind? I should know. I'm not very good. Oh, no.
While you were at Reno, the tilt at the University
of Reno, have you had a lot of natural
history time? The press was, we weren't exactly
one church county, but we were close. We had about
four areas. We had which was a huge thing because,
number one, we were the only people doing it. In
fact, Bob Wagstaff used
to have Lloyd Wyman come in every once in a year for a
three-day review of the press. And they took none
of the advice away. Lloyd told me, he said, I'm not
coming back here anymore. We had vast studies. Bob
Wagstaff was vast. But more importantly, William
Douglass, who was at University of Chicago and
asked anthropologists had developed a very
respected, well-published editor series of the
Baskets. I didn't know it at the time, because he
and I used to... Bob Waxhaw would work the toilet
paper with that check, and I would work Douglas
first. And I wasn't that way with him. I was
deferential to him, but not in any way. So Bill and I
used to match heads. The Baskets, the Bask studies
were very important. And now, those studies were,
and what... Oh, we did everything from
dictionaries to the postural studies. Okay, so
that was really the source of funding rather than
the description of it, rather than the definition
of the program. It was a very good component of the
program. It was probably where we made the most
money. We also published regional history. So
that was a funded series much like we're running
here. No, as a matter of fact, it wasn't a funded
series, but because we had the only one. I mean, we
were literally the only press in the country at
that time, and probably close to it now, who had
really seriously published a vast scholarship.
And so we sold everything we read. Where were they
sold? Oh, libraries. We did some popular books. We
did a Basque book. We did... stuff with the Basque
population in Idaho, Nevada,
and Utah, and Northern California. Oh, yeah, we do
the classic monographs where you do 700 copies and
sell them to our libraries and scholars. Bob
Laxalt, we republished one of his novels,
probably some 10,000 copies now. So a lot of Basque
studies, regional natural history, regional
history. That's right. I remember that, which is
what attracted you to A&M. Yeah, it was good stuff.
Like, I look back and I'm sure. Okay, so in fall of
88, you come to Texas A&M. And what are your several
things, your personal impressions when you walk
in the situation? For example, I always say, you
know, He was impressed and astounded by how
normal people were. And then your impressions of
the status of the A&M grads. How you viewed
them?
I was extraordinarily impressed with the campus,
the size, It's
sort of a sense
of
just presence. The press building was amazing.
I'd never seen anything like that. When you walk in
and the logo comes, the logo is Boston on the floor.
I was just totally blown away. It was just... very
well, it was very
formal, and it was,
and I had the sense, partly from Lloyd, because
he gave me some good advice that I didn't
necessarily follow to my own degree, that
essentially the press was a creature of one name,
and that if you worked there you were sort of in the
service that there was
no dominant
personality there. Like some
presidents, the director would be the big guy. At
A&M, and Gayla was the one who, of course, I
remember a gentleman, Betty Moore, I wanted to
make Gayla the assistant director, and I've been
there for a while, and she was clearly the one, and
she had all things in mind. She was going to be sure
that nobody else had any interest in her. So, but I
was really impressed with everything. Now, when
you say the impression was a creature of one man,
were you talking about Wardlaw? Yeah. Yeah, okay.
But that's good. That fits with what I'm trying to
do and to dispel at the same time. Yeah. And I think
that's what... which is why he was worried about
this chapter. Oh Christ, I'd be scared of death.
Well, obviously. Yeah, the sense
of that was...
Boyd and I went out and got really drunk a bunch of
times before we left. Because he stayed there for a
while. That was extraordinary too. I moved into
the director's office and he was there for a while.
Yeah. Well see now that's what happened to me and
Boyd. Now he and, uh, Wardlaw. Wardlaw, yeah. I
just, I never said anything like that. Yeah. And,
uh, he said, basically, it is what it is. And, uh,
You're not going to win any awards you get going
with the staff, or a part of the staff. He was
absolutely right. Fight out what the strengths
are, how you can play into this. I found some areas
that I did very well. Don't get brugged into
things. that you're
ultimately not going to have any control over your
life. And I used to sit around there after I'd been
there a couple of years, and I would think after a
really bad day, I'm still glad I'm here. That was
sort of the, I'm glad I moved. It was a hard thing. My
wife moving her away from her family and all this
stuff. So I was impressed. I was impressed with the
editorial committee. I was impressed with the
committee that hired me. Just all the stuff going
on. And there were people in the press who I had
heard of for years. I don't know if you know them. I
don't know if you know them. It was interesting
because Billingsley ignored all that crap, and he
raised hell with everybody. He gave a hatin'
advance, very hated advance, but Noel for sure
hated advance because Noel had been left as kind of
the alpha male designate, and Lloyd, if I got this
right, had sort of brought him I
know
there's
a lot of turbulence. Let me tell you one classic
story. I've been there six months and I wanted to do
bypass. Into them, that's right. Was it six months
after you got here? Let's see, I got here in
September. Shit, it wasn't September. The
operation was in the first week of March of 1989. So
I had to get confirmed. Wow. That's tough. Yeah, it
was a surprise. And you've already met Patrick a
couple of times. That takes time. This is the
story. This is a Joe and Betty Moore story. This
wraps around. I'm home, and recuperate. And the
big book was Tom Lee. And they'd gotten, I think,
$95,000 from the King Ranch folks to fund that
book. And at some point, one of them, Lloyd,
determined that it was going to cost more than that
to do the big book. And so he went back to the King
Ranch folks, and the King Ranch folks said, sorry
grants as good as we're gonna do so
he decided
to put it so I get this phone call one day I'm home and
I get a phone call And they had sent out these
invitations to this selective party that he had
near town, that included Tom Lee and his wife, and
Joe and Betty Kluen from Hawaii, and all this
stuff. They went in and said, please join us in
celebrating the new publication of Joe and Betty
Morris, blah, blah, blah. One of the people who got
that was the administrator for the Penn Ranch
Ranking Commission. He was a lawyer in San
Antonio. And he called up and said, well, this is
really interesting, but I can tell you that if you
put John Betty Moore's name on this, that we will
want all the money back, plus the interest that's
included in the last four years. And the next call
I'm going to make is going to be the Chancellor of
the University, so please have Mr. Steader, in
whatever state he might be in, give me a ring. So I
called the guy up. I had dinner, I had lunch with him
one day in San Antonio, so I was unspeakable. We had
a very fuzzy little
conversation. We said, hey, look, I'm not trying
to be a jerk, but I can tell you that the King Ranch
people are not going to think this is funny in the
police after they gave you all this stuff. And
there's no cure for this that doesn't involve
taking their name. It's just simple as that. By
this time, they don't give a fuck. But it happened
in Brown. It happened in Brown. I
called Gaylor on it and said, thanks, and we're
going to have to reprint that first signature,
which fortunately was the only place where the
series designation was given. But I'd never
mentioned it to anybody before, and I knew Gaylor
pretty well, so they wanted to know why. So they
were called in, and as classy folks as they were,
they said, listen, whatever you need to do, you're
the president. And they even still flew in. And
it's planned. So we reprinted the first city. We
actually went and reprinted it.